>> Spencer Schneidenbach: Let's talk
about some of the built-in types for C-#.
So, we've already kind of touched on int,
and we've touched on string,
we've touched on Boolean.
But there are quite a few others, and
I kind of wanted to just mention them and
run through them fairly quickly just so
that we know that they exist.
So first of all, all objects,
all types inherent from object,
even value types, again,
we'll get into that a little bit.
But basically anything in .net is an
object in some ways, including functions,
although it's not nearly as function
first as a language like JavaScript,
but all types inherent from object.
So that's the core type in in C-sharp.
But we have other we
have of course string.
We also have single characters or char or
char I don't know how you pronounce it,
I call it char,
and that is denoted with instead of
on a double quotes for a string.
It's just a single quote.
So, if you have a char, and
you declare it as just the letter G,
you can have the char
be set to that value.
You cannot have an empty char.
You cannot have a char with
more than one char character.
So that's how you declare them.
Not something I declare a super lot of,
but important to know for
single characters, because there is
some important implications to that.
I mean, a string is essentially
just an array of chars,
after all, array of characters.
So that's one of the types,
one of the core types inside.
Boolean represents true or false, a very
important part of any language, very
important part of any ecosystem to be able
to tell if something is true or false.
Because we need to be able to operate
on certain things based on whether or
not it's true or false.
I'm sure that the question will come up,
is there truthy or falsy in C-sharp?
There is not, that is a JavaScript thing,
only you're doing if statements and
similar things on bools.
You're using bools or booleans for
that, strictly speaking.
So, there are other data types,
so like the smallest
kind of a number value, or
the common value is a byte.
A byte is just 8 bit unsigned integer,
and an sbyte is 8 bit
signed integer, so,
pretty typical in most languages.
So represent single bytes
rarely do I declare them if
you're doing any kind of file
processing for a specific file format.
You're probably declaring bytes to read
that file specifically in different
places, but
most of the time I'm not declaring them.
My favorite data type for
declaring integers is indeed int,
int or long depending on the application.
Long just has way more capacity.
So in a database system where
you're getting a bunch of records,
that may be a difference maker in terms of
your ability to not hit some kind of upper
bound in an auto incrementing integer,
which we'll talk about in the next course.
But, for the most part,
if I'm declaring an integer,
I'm just gonna declare it as int.
I do that out of force of habit.
I do that because most other
developers do that as well.
Rarely do I see things declared as short
unless it's unless it actually is going
to be a short.
And even then,
most people just defer to int.
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: Unsigned
integers, shorts,
longs are basically it's exactly how
they say they don't have a positive or
a negative sign in front of the value.
It just is a value.
So the value for unsigned int
would be min value would be 0,
and the max value would be double
the max value of an integer,
because an integer could
can be negative as well,
negative 2 billion, 147 million, right?
That's its range.
That's its potential range of values.
Most of the time I'm just using int,
even for
things that I know are never
gonna to be negative.
Again, it's a force of habit.
It's a consistency thing.
Float, double, and decimal.
So a I'm not gonna get into
whole floating point math.
I don't think I'd be able to explain
it super well, even if I did,
but there are those very important
data types here which represent
numbers that have a well,
as they say, a floating decimal.
So it could be 31.415, and so
we have ways of representing
those inside of the language.
If I'm representing a floating point
value, it's probably going to be a double.
But most of the time, just for
consistency and for precision,
I prefer to use decimal.
Decimal does have,
it does take aditional memory, but
in most cases where I'm using it,
I prefer the consistency.
I don't really see the memory use.
I'm personally a fan of decimals.
It just is for consistency reasons,
that's mainly what I use.
So DateTime,
DateTime is a really important value,
because dates matter Times matter.
So let's talk about that.
Let's talk about a few different things
that dates have, I'm gonna go ahead and
clear out a lot of these things.
So first things first,
there's a couple of
static dates properties
that date times have,
which in this case are.
UTC now, today, and now 99% of
the time in a production system,
I'm going to be UTC now.
So that's going to take the it's
going to give me a representation of
the current time on the system
that the code is executing it.
So if I do Console.WriteLine,
and I do this,
I do open up my terminal,
control shift tilde, I do dotnet run.
You're gonna see that it does indeed
print the current time, which in UTC.
So, I said, there's datetime.today and
datetime.now,
two of which I avoid pretty much at all
costs when I'm writing production systems.
Something I'd like to note is I
mentioned that daytime is immutable.
When you're first programming,
I remember spending 30 minutes banging
my head against a wall, figuring out
strings also that they're immutable.
And trying to figure out why
name two lower did not convert
my name to a lower string.
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: So if I run
this, you'll see that the Spencer variable
that I declared here,
it didn't get lowered.
And that's because these
are immutable by default.
So you can't change them
once they're instantiated,
you can reassign the variable that they're
part of, which is what I'm doing here,
and then we'll get the expected behavior.
DateTime has a lot of the same semantics.
So if you did DateTime.UtcNow.AddDays,
you're not gonna magically
add one day to UTC now.
You're gonna get a new instance of
the of the DateTime object, and
you can see that when you dig
into the the source code.
So you can see that.
And I should tell you, I went in
order to get into the source code.
I think for you it would be I'm not
exactly sure what the button would be, but
for me it's command.
So I command and click.
You can see that it gives me
underlines and then I can go through.
And then I can look at the source code for
this.
And you can see as we get
further in that instance
of the date time itself is not altered.
The only thing that's altered., That
nothing is altered the only thing that's
done is a new copy of
DateTime is being made.
So there are a lot of DateTime methods,
so you can get the current year,
the current day for
that DateTime instance.
You can add days, milliseconds, and
then get new copies of DateTime.
So, very important that you know it,
we're not gonna go through every
single one of these methods,
but it's important that you know
that these things are available.
DateTime.Parse is a way of taking a string
and
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: Declaring a, so
if we do DateTime d = DateTime.Parse
it's a static method, so
that means you don't need
an instance to access it.
And what it'll do is it'll take in a date,
it's fairly forgiving in
terms of the format of the date you
can specify specific date formatters.
Most of the time I let my
frameworks serialize and
deserialize like a JSON
value in a date time.
I let Frameworks do that lifting for me.
But occasionally it's useful to
be able to parse this on its own.
If this thing cannot be parsed, it will
throw an error, which we will talk about,
a little later when we get
to talking about exceptions.
Let's see, this is my spicy take.
This isn't really spicy in
terms of most .NET developers.
I think most production .NET developers
would agree that DateTime.Now is something
that we should avoid, and DateTime.UtcNow
is the thing that you should be using when
you're in a production environment.
So with that, moving on to the next
one of the collection types, and
one of the most important ones is arrays.
As I mentioned, that's a collection
of data when we looked at the params,
kind of method, we saw that there was
that open bracket, close bracket, right?
And that's just array syntax.
So an array is just a an array
of a list of values.
Arrays cannot be changed.
They cannot be resized.
They you in order to resize them,
you have to redeclare them.
That's not like in JavaScript,
where an array you can add or
remove elements from it, arrays are fixed
in size period after they're instantiated.
So, if we declare an array of ints, so
array of integers, we can use, we can do,
this is a fairly new C# feature, but what
you can do is have the array syntax here.
Note that you cannot
declare this as a var.
It kind of goes to the vestigial
nature of some of C#.
It's been around for a long time.
It doesn't know the type.
It doesn't have a type for
this collection and
it doesn't want to make
an assumption about it.
So we have to declare that ahead of time,
which is fine.
So an array of integers,
we have that array.
And that is our list of integers.
You can also declare
an array of integers or
an array of anything without
any specific values in it.
You can give it a number here, and
that just basically says that I wanna
array of size with three elements in it.
Yes Mark.
>> Mark: Can you treat in a string like
an array, like you can in Javascript and
iterate through the characters?
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: Yes, you can.
Yeah, because a string
is an array of chars,
characters so skipping ahead
a little bit in terms of syntax,
but char character in hello world.
You can absolutely iterate through them
and get the I misspelled character,
and get each of the characters
inside of that string.
Good question.
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: Let's see.
Most of the time, the one,
if you have a multidimensional array,
AKA an array that's declared with this.
In practice,
I have not written code that uses this,
that requires multiple or an array
with multiple what they call ranks.
But you can declare them so that you can
have, if you have a coordinate of x's and
y's an array that's declared like that,
might be a good useful time for
that to declare that.
But in this case, the one thing that I
wanna point out is the length property on
the array will tell you how
many elements are in the array.
It's something that I check a lot,
especially if I'm looking to
see if an array is empty.
I will check it and
see if this array is zero,
because I wanna be able to operate or
do something on that based on that value.
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: Enums,
Enums are a set of named constants
is the best way to to put them.
And so the way that you declare
them is with the enum keyword.
So these can be declared
as a separate type.
They're considered a type just like the
rest of like classes and things like that.
So you can declare a type for or
you can declare an enum as a type.
You can also an enum has what's
called an underlying type and
by default the underlying type for
all enums is int.
And the first value here is equal to zero,
the next value here is equal to one,
the value here is equal to two.
You can also explicitly set them most of
the time I am explicitly setting them and
I usually start at one and
then I go one equals or
manager equals one supervisor equals two.
But you can set them to different
values in case you have maybe there's
a mathematical reason you wanna declare
an enum where the integers have specific
meaning to you.
So, you might do that that way.
Let's see.
I mostly don't assign to enums.
I usually just let
the compiler do its thing and
just use them as kind of just dumb markers
unless I'm storing them in a database.
And I typically then will definitely
start with one and assign them.
And the way that you would use them
is pretty much like anything else,
employee type.
We can declare it and
then EmployeeType.Manager,
you can see that we basically are able to
get that type and this will be an enum.
So Console.WriteLine there it's when
it's written to as a string employeeType
will be written as exactly as it looks.
So very cool,
I use enums a lot as discriminators for
different things,
we'll have a type of employee or
a type of payroll or
salary type or things like that.
That's relevant for
the ASP.NET Core Course.
You can also cast them
back to their core type.
So you can see that if
we declare this as int,
this will just go back to being an int.
So like I said,
all enums have an underlying type.
In practice, I only use the int type.
You can declare them as byte, you can
declare them as long, but I only declare
them as int, mostly because I'm just
using enums as, like I said, dumb markers.
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: So, I believe
TypeScript does support string enums.
I don't believe, unless they've added it,
but C# does not support that.
The last thing that we'll
talk about is tuples.
So, I go into this in way more detail
when inside of this documentation,
but essentially a tuple
is just a set of values.
It's a value type, which means that
it's stored in fast access memory.
And it can be made up of just value
types like integer and Boolean, or
reference types like instances of classes.
And pretty much the way that you,
it's basically just a set of values.
You can think of it like an array,
but it doesn't have to share a value.
Tuples are a fairly recent
addition to the language.
They actually had support for them a while
ago, but they weren't very pretty.
This one is a lot easier and nicer to use.
So if you just declare a tuple
without any named Properties,
you can access them via Item1,
Item2, Item3, kinda not super useful.
But not kinda not super useful when
you're trying to name things explicitly.
And you can give them names, so you could
say something like this, for instance.
Where you give the tuple
meaningful names like this.
And then you're able to access them by,
very similar to how
you would a class variable where you
can say, I want personInfo.Age.
Or name as and I want to get their name,
and so on and so forth.
Named tuples are something
that I use a ton of,
especially if I have something like
a method that has a tuple return type.
So I will have Int Age and
then string Name.
If I wanna be able to return multiple
values from a method like this
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: Return 30 Alice,
I wanna be able to access this
such that if I do call this
method GetEmployee, boom,
I can get age and name.
I didn't do it isEmployee, but
I can get those things by name.
So I use tuples,
with tuples I think there's actually
a lot of pronunciations for tuple.
I don't think anybody
[LAUGH] agrees on one.
I always say tuple, but sometimes I
slip and say tuple, whatever the case,
whatever the pronunciation of tuple is.
I use them a lot when I want to have
multiple return types, return things,
values, return from a method.
But I don't wanna declare something
else like a class to hold those values.
We'll talk about that more when
we get to classes and types.
Let's see, we talked about the use cases,
we talked about that.
Okay, this is the last thing.
So, null is a big thing.
There is no, so first of all for
those JavaScripters,
there's no such thing as undefined in
C-sharp, we have null and null is it.
And null is basically saying that
there is no value for this thing.
You cannot do things like set an integer,
this integer to null.
You can't do that because null is a,
the default value for an integer is zero.
You cannot declare
an integer as a null value.
It's somewhere in memory.
It's considered what's stored on
the stack, which we'll touch on briefly.
Null is for
things like classes where there's going
to be multiple there may be there.
It's basically what's it's
called a reference type,
and we'll talk about that more.
We'll talk about the implications of more,
you can consider it,
it's not really a type,
it's more of to say an absence of a type.
But it kind of is an important thing to
touch on in terms of, hey we need it,
this is a thing inside of the language,
but
we'll touch on it a lot
more as we get further in.
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: And
then of course void is actually,
I know it's a key word to say this
method doesn't have a return type.
The fun fact is that void actually
is a type inside of the CLR, but
it's not treated as one
inside of the language.
And yes, I have tried to instantiate
them and no, you cannot do that.
I've tried it many different
ways [LAUGH] just for fun.
But, that is it for types.
Can I answer any questions?
>> Mark: Yes.
>> Student 1: Going back to enums,
when we did that Console.WriteLine for
the employee,
type,
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: Yes.
>> Student 1: Is that
return value than a string?
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: Yes,
that's a good question.
So what Console.WriteLine, it's more
of a behavior of Console.WriteLine.
So you'll see that as you dig in,
as you dig into the source code,
it's not letting me navigate any further.
But essentially,
whatever value is passed into this,
they call its ToString method.
So all, something that's a good thing
to note as we get into objects is that
objects, there's a a few different things.
A few different methods that they all
commonly share, one of them is ToString.
So you can call ToString on any object and
get its string representation.
And under the hood,
that's what WriteLine or
Console.WriteLine is doing is it's
calling its ToString method on that enum.
And when you call to string on enum,
you get.
When you get on the enum not convert,
if you don't convert it
to its underlying type.
You will get if you do
employeeType.Manager.ToString(),
you will get this word back as a string.
Great question.
Yes.
>> Student 2: Is there a way to
get all the values of the enum?
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: Yes, there is.
So that would be done via like.
So if you wanted to do that,
it would be for each var enum in.
We'll just call it E in,
and then... There is
a System.Enum class,
and it has GetValues.
And so what you can do is, Getvalues
you can pass in the type of that enum.
And then be able to iterate through and
get all of the values from that and
print them or whatever the case may be.
Good question.
It would look a little bit like this,
EmployeeType.
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: And then you
could go through and spin through and
Console.WriteLine.
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: E, boom.
>> Student 3: And then you run it, and you
can see that it will happily chew through
and print all of the different enum
values to the to the console.
>> Spencer Schneidenbach: Good question.